.\" Manpage for mechanicsdsl
.\" Contact nomapa223@gmail.com for corrections.
.TH MECHANICSDSL 1 "January 2026" "v2.0.1" "MechanicsDSL Manual"

.SH NAME
mechanicsdsl \- domain-specific language compiler for computational physics

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mechanicsdsl
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B MechanicsDSL
is a domain-specific language and compiler framework for computational physics. 
It allows you to write physics in natural LaTeX-inspired notation and 
automatically generates working simulations and production code in 11 languages.

The DSL supports 9 physics domains: classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, 
electromagnetism, special relativity, general relativity, fluid dynamics (SPH), 
statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, and orbital mechanics.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
.B compile \fIinput\fR \-\-target \fItarget\fR [\-\-output \fIpath\fR]
Compile DSL file to target language.

Available targets: cpp, cuda, rust, julia, fortran, matlab, javascript, 
wasm/webassembly, python, arduino, openmp.

.TP
.B run \fIinput\fR [\-\-t\-span \fIstart,end\fR] [\-\-points \fIn\fR] [\-\-animate] [\-\-output \fIfile\fR]
Run a simulation from DSL file.

Options:
  \-\-t\-span    Time span as start,end (default: 0,10)
  \-\-points    Number of time points (default: 1000)
  \-\-animate   Show animation
  \-\-output    Save results to JSON file

.TP
.B export \fIinput\fR \-\-format \fIfmt\fR [\-\-output \fIfile\fR]
Export simulation results.

Available formats: json, csv, numpy/npz.

.TP
.B validate \fIinput\fR
Validate a DSL file without running the simulation. Reports syntax errors 
and displays system information if valid.

.TP
.B info
Show version, available physics domains, code generation targets, 
and optional feature availability.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-\-version, \-v
Print version information and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-help, \-h
Print help message and exit.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
Compile a pendulum to C++:
.B mechanicsdsl compile pendulum.mdsl \-\-target cpp

.TP
Run simulation with animation:
.B mechanicsdsl run double_pendulum.mdsl \-\-t\-span 0,30 \-\-animate

.TP
Export results to CSV:
.B mechanicsdsl export orbit.mdsl \-\-format csv \-\-output trajectory.csv

.TP
Validate DSL syntax:
.B mechanicsdsl validate myfile.mdsl

.SH DSL SYNTAX

The MechanicsDSL language uses LaTeX-inspired commands:

.nf
\\system{name}           Define system name
\\defvar{q}{desc}        Define generalized coordinate
\\parameter{p}{val}{u}   Define physical parameter
\\lagrangian{expr}       Specify Lagrangian L = T - V
\\hamiltonian{expr}      Specify Hamiltonian H
\\constraint{expr}       Add holonomic constraint
\\force{expr}            Add non-conservative force
\\initial{q=val}         Set initial conditions
.fi

Derivative notation:
  \\dot{q}   First time derivative (dq/dt)
  \\ddot{q}  Second time derivative (d²q/dt²)
  \\frac{a}{b}  Fraction

.SH PHYSICS DOMAINS

Classical Mechanics (17 modules), Quantum Mechanics, Electromagnetism,
Special Relativity, General Relativity, Fluid Dynamics (SPH),
Statistical Mechanics, Thermodynamics, Orbital Mechanics.

.SH CODE GENERATION TARGETS

C++, CUDA, Rust, Julia, Fortran, MATLAB, JavaScript, WebAssembly,
Python, Arduino, OpenMP.

.SH FILES

.TP
.I ~/.mechanicsdsl/
User configuration directory

.TP
.I *.mdsl
MechanicsDSL source files

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B MECHANICSDSL_DEBUG
Set to any value to enable debug output and full stack traces on errors.

.SH AUTHOR
Noah Parsons <nomapa223@gmail.com>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/MechanicsDSL/mechanicsdsl/issues

.SH COPYRIGHT
MIT License. 
See https://github.com/MechanicsDSL/mechanicsdsl/blob/main/LICENSE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python3 (1),
.BR pip (1)

Full documentation at: https://mechanicsdsl.readthedocs.io
